A browser with JavaScript enabled is required for this page to operate
properly.

# Glossary of Terms

For simplicity, \"the Java^TM^ platform\" is called Java in the
following definitions. []{#top}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[A](\#A) [B](#B) [C](#C) [D](#D) [E](#E) [F](#F) [G](#G) [H](#H) [I](#I)
[J](#J) [K](#K) [L](#L) [M](#M) [N](#N) [O](#O) [P](#P) [Q](#Q) [R](#R)
[S](#S) [T](#T) [U](#U) [V](#V) [W](#W) [X](#X) [Y](#Y) [Z](\#Z)\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*[100% Pure Java(TM)]{#purejava}*

A Sun Microsystems initiative to guide developers in writing,
certifying, and marketing applications written entirely in the Java(TM)
programming language.

[***A***]{#A}

*[Abstract Window Toolkit (AWT)]{#awt}*

A collection of graphical user interface (GUI) components that were
implemented using native-platform versions of the components. These
components provide that subset of functionality which is common to all
native platforms. Largely supplanted by the Project Swing component set.
See also *[Swing Set](#Swing%20Set)*.

*[abstract]{#abstract}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used in a class definition to
specify that a class is not to be instantiated, but rather inherited by
other classes. An abstract class can have abstract methods that are not
implemented in the abstract class, but in subclasses.

*[abstract class]{#abstract class}*

A class that contains one or more *abstract methods*, and therefore can
never be instantiated. Abstract classes are defined so that other
classes can extend them and make them concrete by implementing the
abstract methods.

*[abstract method]{#abstract method}*

A method that has no implementation.

*[actual parameter list]{#actual parameter list}*

The arguments specified in a particular method call. See also *[formal
parameter list](#formal%20parameter%20list)*.

*[alpha value]{#alpha value}*

A value that indicates the opacity of a pixel.

*[API]{#API}*

Application Programming Interface. The specification of how a programmer
writing an application accesses the behavior and state of classes and
objects.

*[appliances]{#appliances}*

Networked devices such as printers, Java(TM) technology-enabled
terminals, and clients, that are managed using applications built using
the Java Management API (JMAPI).

*[applet]{#applet}*

A program written in the Java(TM) programming language to run within a
web browser compatible with the Java platform, such as HotJava(TM) or
Netscape Navigator(TM).

*[argument]{#argument}*

A data item specified in a method call. An argument can be a literal
value, a variable, or an expression.

*[array]{#array}*

A collection of data items, all of the same type, in which each item\'s
position is uniquely designated by an integer.

*[ASCII]{#ascii}*

American Standard Code for Information Interchange. A standard
assignment of 7-bit numeric codes to characters. See also
*[Unicode](#Unicode)*.

*[atomic]{#atomic}*

Refers to an operation that is never interrupted or left in an
incomplete state under any circumstance.

[***B***]{#B}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

*[Bean]{#Bean}*

A reusable software component. Beans can be combined to create an
application.

*[binary operator]{#binary operator}*

An operator that has two arguments.

*[bit]{#bit}*

The smallest unit of information in a computer, with a value of either 0
or 1.

*[bitwise operator]{#bitwise operator}*

An operator that manipulates two values comparing each bit of one value
to the corresponding bit of the other value.

*[block]{#block}*

In the Java(TM) programming language, any code between matching braces.
Example: `{ x = 1; }`.

*[boolean]{#boolean}*

Refers to an expression or variable that can have only a true or false
value. The Java(TM) programming language provides the boolean type and
the literal values true and false.

*[bounding box]{#bounding box}*

For a Raster object, the smallest rectangle that completely encloses all
the pixels that are not fully transparent.

*[break]{#break}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used to resume program execution
at the statement immediately following the current statement. If
followed by a label, the program resumes execution at the labeled
statement.

*[byte]{#byte}*

A sequence of eight bits. The Java(TM) programming language provides a
corresponding `byte` type.

*[bytecode]{#bytecode}*

Machine-independent code generated by the Java(TM) compiler and executed
by the Java interpreter.

[***C***]{#C}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

*[case]{#case}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword that defines a group of
statements to begin executing if a value specified matches the value
defined by a preceding \"switch\" keyword.

*[casting]{#casting}*

Explicit conversion from one data type to another.

*[catch]{#catch}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used to declare a block of
statements to be executed in the event that a Java exception, or run
time error, occurs in a preceding \"try\" block.

*[char]{#char}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used to declare a variable of
type character.

*[class]{#class}*

In the Java(TM) programming language, a type that defines the
implementation of a particular kind of object. A class definition
defines instance and class variables and methods, as well as specifying
the interfaces the class implements and the immediate superclass of the
class. If the superclass is not explicitly specified, the superclass
will implicitly be `Object`.

*[class method]{#class method}*

A method that is invoked without reference to a particular object. Class
methods affect the class as a whole, not a particular instance of the
class. Also called a *[static method](#static%20method)*. See also
*[instance method](#instance%20method)*.

*[classpath]{#classpath}*

A classpath is an environmental variable which tells the Java(TM)
virtual machine**\*** and Java technology-based applications (for
example, the tools located in the JDK(TM) 1.1.X\\bin directory) where to
find the class libraries, including user-defined class libraries.

*[class variable]{#class variable}*

A data item associated with a particular class as a whole\--not with
particular instances of the class. Class variables are defined in class
definitions. Also called a *[static field](#static%20field)*. See also
*[instance variable](#instance%20variable)*.

*[client]{#client}*

In the client/server model of communcations, the client is a process
that remotely accesses resources of a compute server, such as compute
power and large memory capacity.

*[codebase]{#codebase}*

Works together with the `code` attribute in the `<APPLET>` tag to give a
complete specification of where to find the main applet class file: code
specifies the name of the file, and codebase specifies the URL of the
directory containing the file.

*[comment]{#comment}*

In a program, explanatory text that is ignored by the compiler. In
programs written in the Java(TM) programming language, comments are
delimited using `//` or `/*`\...`*/`.

*[compilation unit]{#compilation unit}*

The smallest unit of source code that can be compiled. In the current
implementation of the Java(TM) platform, the compilation unit is a file.

*[compiler]{#compiler}*

A program to translate source code into code to be executed by a
computer. The Java(TM) compiler translates source code written in the
Java programming language into bytecode for the Java virtual
machine**\***. See also *[interpreter](#interpreter)*.

*[compositing]{#compositing}*

The process of superimposing one image on another to create a single
image.

*[constructor]{#constructor}*

A pseudo-method that creates an object. In the Java(TM) programming
language, constructors are instance methods with the same name as their
class. Constructors are invoked using the `new` keyword.

*[const]{#const}*

This is a reserved Java(TM) programming language keyword. However, it is
not used by current versions of the Java programming language.

*[continue]{#continue}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used to resume program execution
at the end of the current loop. If followed by a label, \"continue\"
resumes execution where the label occurs.

*[core class]{#core class}*

A public class (or interface) that is a standard member of the Java(TM)
Platform. The intent is that the core classes for the Java platform, at
minimum, are available on all operating systems where the Java platform
runs. A program written entirely in the Java programming language relies
only on core classes, meaning it can run anywhere. See also, *[100% Pure
Java(TM)](#purejava)*.

*[Core Packages]{#Core Packages}*

The required set of APIs in a Java platform edition which must be
supported in any and all compatible implementations.

*[critical section]{#critical section}*

A segment of code in which a thread uses resources (such as certain
instance variables) that can be used by other threads, but that must not
be used by them at the same time.

[***D***]{#D}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

*[declaration]{#declaration}*

A statement that establishes an identifier and associates attributes
with it, without necessarily reserving its storage (for data) or
providing the implementation (for methods). See also *definition*.

*[default]{#default}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword optionally used after all
\"case\" conditions in a \"switch\" statement. If all \"case\"
conditions are not matched by the value of the \"switch\" variable, the
\"default\" keyword will be executed.

*[definition]{#definition}*

A declaration that reserves storage (for data) or provides
implementation (for methods). See also *declaration*.

*[deprecation]{#deprecation}*

Refers to a class, interface, constructor, method or field that is no
longer recommended, and may cease to exist in a future version.

*[derived from]{#derived from}*

Class X is \"derived from\" class Y if class X *extends* class Y. See
also *[subclass](#subclass)*, *[superclass](#superclass)*.

*[distributed]{#distributed}*

Running in more than one address space.

*[do]{#do}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used to declare a loop that will
iterate a block of statements. The loop\`s exit condition can be
specified with the \"while\" keyword.

*[double]{#double}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used to define a variable of
type double.

*[double precision]{#double precision}*

In the Java(TM) programming language specification, describes a floating
point number that holds 64 bits of data. See also *[single
precision](#single%20precision)*.

[***E***]{#E}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

*[else]{#else}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used to execute a block of
statements in the case that the test condition with the \"if\" keyword
evaluates to false.

*[EmbeddedJava(TM) Technology]{#embeddedjava}*

The availability of Sun\'s Java 2 Platform, Micro Edition technology
under a restrictive license agreement that allows a licensee to leverage
certain Java technologies to create and deploy a closed-box application
that exposes no APIs.

*[encapsulation]{#encapsulation}*

The localization of knowledge within a module. Because objects
encapsulate data and implementation, the user of an object can view the
object as a black box that provides services. Instance variables and
methods can be added, deleted, or changed, but as long as the services
provided by the object remain the same, code that uses the object can
continue to use it without being rewritten. See also *[instance
variable](#instance%20variable)*, *instance method*.

*[exception]{#exception}*

An event during program execution that prevents the program from
continuing normally; generally, an error. The Java(TM) programming
language supports exceptions with the try, catch, and throw keywords.
See also *exception handler*.

*[exception handler]{#exception handler}*

A block of code that reacts to a specific type of *exception*. If the
exception is for an error that the program can recover from, the program
can resume executing after the exception handler has executed.

*[executable content]{#executable content}*

An application that runs from within an HTML file. See also
*[applet](#applet)*.

*[extends]{#extends}*

Class X extends class Y to add functionality, either by adding fields or
methods to class Y, or by overriding methods of class Y. An interface
extends another interface by adding methods. Class X is said to be a
subclass of class Y. See also *[derived from](#derived%20from)*.

[***F***]{#F}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

*[FCS]{#FCS}*

First Customer Ship. The day in which a product is released/shipped to
the customer.

*[field]{#field}*

A data member of a class. Unless specified otherwise, a field is not
static.

*[final]{#final}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword. You define an entity once and
cannot change it or derive from it later. More specifically: a final
class cannot be subclassed, a final method cannot be overridden and a
final variable cannot change from its initialized value.

*[finally]{#finally}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword that executes a block of
statements regardless of whether a Java Exception, or run time error,
occurred in a block defined previously by the \"try\" keyword.

*[float]{#float}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used to define a floating point
number variable.

*[for]{#for}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used to declare a loop that
reiterates statements. The programmer can specify the statements to be
executed, exit conditions, and initialization variables for the loop.

*[FTP]{#FTP}*

The basic Internet File Transfer Protocol. FTP, which is based on
TCP/IP, enables the fetching and storing of files between hosts on the
Internet. See also *[TCP/IP](#tcp)*.

*[formal parameter list]{#formal parameter list}*

The parameters specified in the definition of a particular method. See
also *[actual parameter list](#actual%20parameter%20list)*.

[***G***]{#G}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

*[garbage collection]{#garbage collection}*

The automatic detection and freeing of memory that is no longer in use.
The Java(TM) runtime system performs garbage collection so that
programmers never explicitly free objects.

*[goto]{#goto}*

This is a reserved Java(TM) programming language keyword. However, it is
not used by current versions of the Java programming language.

*[GUI]{#GUI}*

Graphical User Interface. Refers to the techniques involved in using
graphics, along with a keyboard and a mouse, to provide an easy-to-use
interface to some program.

[***H***]{#H}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

*[hexadecimal]{#hexadecimal}*

The numbering system that uses 16 as its base. The marks 0-9 and a-f (or
equivalently A-F) represent the digits 0 through 15. In programs written
in the Java(TM) programming language, hexadecimal numbers must be
preceded with 0x. See also *[octal](#octal)*.

*[hierarchy]{#hierarchy}*

A classification of relationships in which each item except the top one
(known as the root) is a specialized form of the item above it. Each
item can have one or more items below it in the hierarchy. In the
Java(TM) class hierarchy, the root is the `Object` class.

*[HotJava(TM) Browser]{#HotJava}*

An easily customizable Web browser developed by Sun Microsystems, which
is written in the Java(TM) programming language.

*[HTML]{#HTML}*

HyperText Markup Language. This is a file format, based on SGML, for
hypertext documents on the Internet. It is very simple and allows for
the embedding of images, sounds, video streams, form fields and simple
text formatting. References to other objects are embedded using URLs.

*[HTTP]{#HTTP}*

HyperText Transfer Protocol. The Internet protocol, based on TCP/IP,
used to fetch hypertext objects from remote hosts. See also
*[TCP/IP](#tcp)*.

[***I***]{#I}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

*[IDL]{#IDL}*

Interface Definition Language. APIs written in the Java(TM) programming
language that provide standards-based interoperability and connectivity
with CORBA (Common Object Request Broker Architecture).

*[identifier]{#identifier}*

The name of an item in a program written in the Java(TM) programming
language.

*[if]{#if}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used to conduct a conditional
test and execute a block of statements if the test evaluates to true.

*[implements]{#implements}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword optionally included in the class
declaration to specify any interfaces that are implemented by the
current class.

*[import]{#import}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used at the beginning of a
source file that can specify classes or entire packages to be referred
to later without including their package names in the reference.

*[inheritance]{#inheritance}*

The concept of classes automatically containing the variables and
methods defined in their *[supertypes](#supertype)*. See also
*[superclass](#superclass)*, *[subclass](#subclass)*.

*[instance]{#instance}*

An object of a particular class. In programs written in the Java(TM)
programming language, an instance of a class is created using the `new`
operator followed by the class name.

*[instance method]{#instance method}*

Any method that is invoked with respect to an instance of a class. Also
called simply a *[method](#method)*. See also *[class
method](#class%20method)*.

*[instance variable]{#instance variable}*

Any item of data that is associated with a particular object. Each
instance of a class has its own copy of the instance variables defined
in the class. Also called a *[field](#field)*. See also *[class
variable](#class%20variable)*.

*[instanceof]{#instanceof}*

A two-argument Java(TM) programming language keyword that tests whether
the run-time type of its first argument is assignment compatible with
its second argument.

*[int]{#int}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used to define a variable of
type integer.

*[interface]{#interface}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used to define a collection of
method definitions and constant values. It can later be implemented by
classes that define this interface with the \"implements\" keyword.

*[Internet]{#Internet}*

An enormous network consisting of literally millions of hosts from many
organizations and countries around the world. It is physically put
together from many smaller networks and data travels by a common set of
protocols.

*[IP]{#IP}*

Internet Protocol. The basic protocol of the Internet. It enables the
unreliable delivery of individual packets from one host to another. It
makes no guarantees about whether or not the packet will be delivered,
how long it will take, or if multiple packets will arrive in the order
they were sent. Protocols built on top of this add the notions of
connection and reliability. See also *[TCP/IP](#tcp)*.

*[interpreter]{#interpreter}*

A module that alternately decodes and executes every statement in some
body of code. The Java(TM) interpreter decodes and executes bytecode for
the Java virtual machine**\***. See also *[compiler](#compiler)*,
*[runtime system](#runtime%20system)*.

[***J***]{#J}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

*[JAE]{#JAE}*

Java(TM) Application Environment. The source code release of the Java
Development Kit (JDK(TM)) software.

*[JAR Files (.jar)]{#JAR Files}*

Java ARchive. A file format used for aggregating many files into one.

*[JAR file format]{#JAR file format}*

JAR (Java Archive) is a platform-independent file format that aggregates
many files into one. Multiple applets written in the Java(TM)
programming language, and their requisite components (.class files,
images, sounds and other resource files) can be bundled in a JAR file
and subsequently downloaded to a browser in a single HTTP transaction.
It also supports file compression and digital signatures.

*[Java(TM)]{#Java}*

Sun\'s trademark for a set of technologies for creating and safely
running software programs in both stand-alone and networked
environments.

*[Java Application Environment (JAE)]{#JAE}*

The source code release of the Java Development Kit (JDK(TM)) software.

*[JavaBeans(TM)]{#JavaBeans}*

A portable, platform-independent reusable component model.

*[Java Blend(TM)]{#Java Blend}*

A product that enables developers to simplify database application
development by mapping database records to objects in the Java(TM)
programming language (Java objects) and Java objects to databases.

*[Java Card(TM) API]{#Java Card}*

An ISO 7816-4 compliant application environment focused on smart cards.

*[JavaCheck(TM)]{#JavaCheck}*

A tool for checking compliance of applications and applets to a
specification.

*[JavaChip(TM)]{#JavaChip}*

Sun\'s processor, which executes bytecode for the Java(TM) virtual
machine**\*** natively. With a JavaChip processor, bytecode bypasses the
virtual machine or just-in-time compiler stage to go directly to the
processor.

*[Java(TM) Compatibility Kit (JCK)]{#JCK}*

A test suite, a set of tools, and other requirements used to certify a
Java platform implementation conformant both to the applicable Java
platform specifications and to Java Software reference implementations.

*[Java Database Connectivity (JDBC(TM))]{#Java Database Connectivity}*

An industry standard for database-independent connectivity between the
Java(TM) platform and a wide range of databases. The JDBC(TM) provides a
call-level API for SQL-based database access.

*[Java Developer Connection(SM)]{#JDC}*

A service designed for individual developers, providing online training,
product discounts, feature articles, bug information, and early access
capabilities.

*[Java Development Kit (JDK(TM))]{#Java Development Kit}*

A software development environment for writing applets and applications
in the Java programming language.

*[Java(TM) Electronic Commerce Framework]{#JECF}*

A structured architecture for the development of electronic commerce
applications in the Java(TM) programming language.

*[Java(TM) Enterprise API]{#Java Enterprise API}*

This API makes it easy to create large-scale commercial and database
applications that can share multimedia data with other applications
within an organization or across the Internet. Four APIs have been
designed within the Java(TM) Enterprise API family.

*[Java(TM) Foundation Classes (JFC)]{#swing}*

An extension that adds graphical user interface class libraries to the
Abstract Windowing Toolkit (AWT).

*[Java(TM) Interface Definition Language (IDL)]{#Java IDL}*

APIs written in the Java programming language that provide
standards-based interoperability and connectivity with CORBA (Common
Object Request Broker Architecture).

*[Java(TM) Media APIs]{#Java Media APIs}*

A set of APIs that support the integration of audio and video clips, 2D
fonts, graphics, and images as well as 3D models and telephony.

*[Java(TM) Media Framework]{#Java Media Framework}*

The core framework supports clocks for synchronizing between different
media (e.g., audio and video output). The standard extension framework
allows users to do full audio and video streaming.

*[Java Naming and Directory Interface(TM)
(JNDI)]{#Java Naming and Directory Interface}*

A set of APIs that assists with the interfacing to multiple naming and
directory services.

*[JavaOS(TM)]{#JavaOS}*

An Java(TM) technology-based operating system that is optimized to run
on a variety of computing and consumer platforms. The JavaOS(TM)
operating environment provides a runtime specifically tuned to run
applications written in the Java programming language directly on
hardware platforms without requiring a host operating system.

*[JavaPlan(TM)]{#JavaPlan}*

An object-oriented design and diagramming tool written in the Java(TM)
programming language.

*[Java(TM) Platform]{#Java Platform}*

Consists of a language for writing programs (\"the Java(TM) programming
language\"); a set of APIs, class libraries, and other programs used in
developing, compiling, and error-checking programs; and a virtual
machine which loads and executes the class files.\
\
In addition, the Java platform is subject to a set of compatibility
requirements to ensure consistent and compatible implementations.
Implementations that meet the compatibility requirements may qualify for
Sun\'s targeted compatibility brands.\
\
The Java(TM) 2 platform is the current generation of the Java platform.

*[Java(TM) Platform Editions]{#Java Platform Editions}*

A Java platform \"edition\" is a definitive and agreed-upon version of
the Java platform that provides the functionality needed over a broad
market segment.\
\
An edition is comprised of two kinds of API sets: (i) \"core packages,\"
which are essential to all implementations of a given platform edition,
and (ii) \"optional packages,\" which are available for a given platform
edition and which may be supported in a compatible implementation.\
\
There are 3 distinct editions of the Java Platform:\
\
\* Java 2 Platform, Enterprise Edition:\
The edition of the Java platform that is targeted at enterprises to
enable development, deployment, and management of multi-tier
server-centric applications.\
\
\* Java 2 Platform, Standard Edition:\
The edition of the Java platform that enables development, deployment,
and management of cross-platform, general-purpose applications.\
\
\* Java 2 Platform, Micro Edition:\
The edition of the Java platform that is targeted at small, standalone
or connectable consumer and embedded devices to enable development,
deployment, and management of applications that can scale from smart
cards through mobile devices and set-top boxes to conventional computing
devices.

*[Java(TM) Remote Method Invocation (RMI)]{#JRMI}*

A distributed object model for Java(TM) program to Java program, in
which the methods of remote objects written in the Java programming
language can be invoked from other Java virtual machines**\***, possibly
on different hosts.

*[Java(TM) Runtime Environment (JRE)]{#Java Runtime Environment}*

A subset of the Java Development Kit (JDK(TM)) for end-users and
developers who want to redistribute the runtime environment alone. The
Java runtime environment consists of the Java virtual machine**\***, the
Java core classes, and supporting files.

*[JavaSafe(TM)]{#JavaSafe}*

A tool for tracking and managing source file changes, written in the
Java(TM) programming language.

*[JavaScript(TM)]{#JavaScript}*

A Web scripting language that is used in both browsers and Web servers.
Like all scripting languages, it is used primarily to tie other
components together or to accept user input.

*[Java Studio(TM)]{#Java Studio}*

The first program that allows you to easily create Java(TM)
technology-based applications and applets without having to know the
Java programming language.

*[Java(TM) Technologies]{#Java Technologies}*

A set of technologies that enable the creation and safe running of
software programs in both stand-alone and networked environments.

*[Java(TM) virtual machine (JVM)\*]{#Java virtual machine}*

Sun\'s specification for or implementation of a software \"execution
engine\" that safely and compatibly executes the byte codes in Java
class files on a microprocessor (whether in a computer or in another
electronic device).\
\
\* Java HotSpot(TM) performance engine - Sun\'s ultra-high-performance
engine for implementing the Java runtime environment which features an
adaptive compiler that dynamically optimizes the performance of running
applications.\
\
\* KJava(TM) virtual machine - Sun\'s small-footprint, highly optimized
foundation of a runtime environment within the Java 2 Platform, Micro
Edition. Derived from the Java virtual machine, it is targeted at small
connected devices and can scale from 30KB to approximately 128KB,
depending on the target device\'s functionality.\
\
\* Java Card(TM) virtual machine - Sun\'s ultra-small-footprint,
highly-optimized foundation of a runtime environment within the Java 2
Platform, Micro Edition. Derived from the Java virtual machine, it is
targeted at smart cards and other severely memory-constrained devices
and can run in devices with memory as small as 24K of ROM, 16K of
EEPROM, and 512 bytes of RAM.

*[Java Web Server(TM)]{#Java Web Server}*

The easy-to-use, extensible, easy-to-administer, secure,
platform-independent solution to speed and simplify the deployment and
management of your Internet and Intranet Web sites. It provides
immediate productivity for robust, full-featured, Java technology-based
server applications.

*[Java Workshop(TM)]{#Java Workshop}*

A complete set of tools integrated into a single environment for
managing programming with Java technology. The Java Workshop software
uses a highly modular structure that enables you to easily plug new
tools into the overall structure.

*[Java(TM) wallet]{#Java wallet}*

A user interface, built on the Java(TM) Electronic Commerce Framework,
which allows for online purchases, value transfers, and administrative
functions.

*[JavaSpaces(TM)]{#JavaSpaces}*

A technology that provides distributed persistence and data exchange
mechanisms for code in the Java(TM) programming language.

*[JavaSoft(TM)]{#JavaSoft}*

A former business unit of Sun Microsystems, Inc., currently known as Sun
Microsystems, Inc., Java Software division.

*[JDBC(TM)]{#JDBC}*

Java(TM) Database Connectivity. An industry standard for
database-independent connectivity between the Java platform and a wide
range of databases. The JDBC interface provides a call-level API for
SQL-based database access.

*[JDK(TM)]{#JDK}*

Java(TM) Development Kit software. A software development environment
for writing applets and application in the Java programming language.

*[JFC]{#JFC}*

Java(TM) Foundation Class. An extension that adds graphical user
interface class libraries to the Abstract Windowing Toolkit (AWT).

*[Jini(TM) Technology]{#Jini}*

Sun\'s Jini technology includes a set of APIs that may be incorporated
an optional package for any Java 2 platform edition. This set of APIs
enables transparent networking of devices and services and eliminates
the need for system or network administration intervention by a user.\
\
The Jini technology is currently an optional package available on all
Java 2 platform editions.

*[JMAPI]{#JMAPI}*

Java(TM) Management API. A collection of Java programming language
classes and interfaces that allow developers to build system, network,
and service management applications.

*[JNDI]{#JNDI}*

Java Naming and Directory Interface(TM). A set of APIs that assist with
the interfacing to multiple naming and directory services.

*[JPEG]{#JPEG}*

Joint Photographic Experts Group. An image file compression standard
established by this group. It achieves tremendous compression at the
cost of introducing distortions into the image which are almost always
imperceptible.

*[JRE]{#JRE}*

Java(TM) runtime environment. A subset of the Java Developer Kit for
end-users and developers who want to redistribute the runtime
environment. The Java runtime environment consists of the Java virtual
machine**\***, the Java core classes, and supporting files.

*[Just-in-time (JIT) Compiler]{#JIT}*

A compiler that converts all of the bytecode into native machine code
just as a Java(TM) program is run. This results in run-time speed
improvements over code that is interpreted by a Java virtual
machine**\***.

*[JVM]{#JVM}*

Java(TM) Virtual Machine**\***. The part of the Java Runtime Environment
responsible for interpreting bytecodes.

[***K***]{#K}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

*[keyword]{#keyword}*

The Java(TM) programming language sets aside words as keywords - these
words are reserved by the language itself and therefore are not
available as names for variables or methods.

[***L***]{#L}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

*[lexical]{#lexical}*

Pertaining to how the characters in source code are translated into
tokens that the compiler can understand.

*[linker]{#linker}*

A module that builds an executable, complete program from component
machine code modules. The Java(TM) linker creates a runnable program
from compiled classes. See also *[compiler](#compiler)*,
*[interpreter](#interpreter)*, *[runtime system](#runtime%20system)*.

*[literal]{#literal}*

The basic representation of any integer, floating point, or character
value. For example, 3.0 is a double-precision floating point literal,
and \"a\" is a character literal.

*[local variable]{#local variable}*

A data item known within a block, but inaccessible to code outside the
block. For example, any variable defined within a method is a local
variable and can\'t be used outside the method.

*[long]{#long}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used to define a variable of
type long.

[***M***]{#M}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

*[member]{#member}*

A *[field](#field)* or *[method](#method)* of a class. Unless specified
otherwise, a member is not static.

*[method]{#method}*

A function defined in a class. See also *[instance
method](#instance%20method)*, *[class method](#class%20method)*. Unless
specified otherwise, a method is not static.

*[Mosaic]{#Mosaic}*

A program that provides a simple GUI that enables easy access to the
data stored on the Internet. These data may be simple files or hypertext
documents. Mosaic was written by a team at *[NCSA](#NCSA)*.

*[multithreaded]{#multithreaded}*

Describes a program that is designed to have parts of its code execute
concurrently. See also *[thread](#thread)*.

[***N***]{#N}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

*[native]{#native}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword that is used in method
declarations to specify that the method is not implemented in the same
Java source file, but rather in another language.

*[NCSA]{#NCSA}*

National Center for Supercomputer Applications. See also
*[Mosaic](#Mosaic)*.

*[new]{#new}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used to create an instance of a
class.

*[null]{#null}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used to specify an undefined
value for reference variables.

[***O***]{#O}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

*[object]{#object}*

The principal building blocks of object-oriented programs. Each object
is a programming unit consisting of data (*[instance
variables](#instance%20variable)*) and functionality (*[instance
methods](#instance%20method)*). See also *[class](#class)*.

*[object-oriented design]{#object-oriented design}*

A software design method that models the characteristics of abstract or
real objects using classes and objects.

*[octal]{#octal}*

The numbering system using 8 as its base, using the numerals 0-7 as its
digits. In programs written in the Java(TM) programming language, octal
numbers must be preceded with 0. See also *[hexadecimal](#hexadecimal)*.

*[Optional Packages]{#Optional Packages}*

The set or sets of APIs in a Java platform edition which are available
with and may be supported in a compatible implementation.\
\
Over time, optional packages may become required in an edition as the
marketplace requires them.

*[overloading]{#overloading}*

Using one identifier to refer to multiple items in the same scope. In
the Java(TM) programming language, you can overload methods but not
variables or operators.

*[overriding]{#overriding}*

Providing a different implementation of a method in a subclass of the
class that originally defined the method.

[***P***]{#P}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

*[package]{#package}*

A group of *[types](#types)*. Packages are declared with the `package`
keyword.

*[peer]{#peer}*

In networking, any functional unit in the same layer as another entity.

*[PersonalJava(TM)]{#PeronsalJava}*

A Java runtime environment for network-connectable applications on
personal consumer devices for home, office, and mobile use.

*[pixel]{#pixel}*

The smallest addressable picture element on a display screen or printed
page.

*[POSIX]{#POSIX}*

Portable Operating System for UNIX(TM). A standard that defines the
language interface between the UNIX operating system and application
programs through a minimal set of supported functions.

*[private]{#private}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used in a method or variable
declaration. It signifies that the method or variable can only be
accessed by other elements of its class.

*[process]{#process}*

A virtual address space containing one or more threads.

*[property]{#property}*

Characteristics of an object that users can set, such as the color of a
window.

*[Profiles]{#Profiles}*

A Profile is a collection of Java APIs that complements one or more Java
2 Platform Editions by adding domain-specific capabilities. Profiles may
also include other defined Profiles. A profile implementation requires a
Java 2 Platform Edition to create a complete development and deployment
environment in a targeted vertical market. Each profile is subject to an
associated set of compatibility requirements.\
\
Profiles may be usable on one or more editions.\
\
Some examples of profiles within the Java 2 Platform, Micro Edition
are:\
\
\* PersonalJava(TM) - for non-PC products that need to display
web-compatible Java-based content\
\
\* Java Card(TM) - for secure smart cards and other severely
memory-constrained devices.

*[protected]{#protected}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used in a method or variable
declaration. It signifies that the method or variable can only be
accessed by elements residing in its class, subclasses, or classes in
the same package.

*[public]{#public}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used in a method or variable
declaration. It signifies that the method or variable can be accessed by
elements residing in other classes.

[***Q***]{#Q}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

[***R***]{#R}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

*[raster]{#raster}*

A line of pixels.

*[reference]{#reference}*

A data element whose value is an address.

*[return]{#return}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used to finish the execution of
a method. It can be followed by a value required by the method
definition.

*[RFE]{#RFE}*

Request for Enhancement.

*[RMI]{#RMI}*

See *[Java Remote Method Invocation](#JRMI)*.

*[root]{#root}*

In a hierarchy of items, the one item from which all other items are
descended. The root item has nothing above it in the hierarchy. See also
*[hierarchy](#hierarchy)*, *[class](#class)*, *[package](#package)*.

*[RPC]{#RPC}*

Remote Procedure Call. Executing what looks like a normal procedure call
(or method invocation) by sending network packets to some remote host.

*[runtime system]{#runtime system}*

The software environment in which programs compiled for the Java(TM)
virtual machine**\*** can run. The runtime system includes all the code
necessary to load programs written in the Java programming language,
dynamically link native methods, manage memory, handle exceptions, and
an implementation of the Java virtual machine, which may be a Java
interpreter.

[***S***]{#S}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

*[Sandbox]{#Sandbox}*

Comprises a number of cooperating system components, ranging from
security managers that execute as part of the application, to security
measures designed into the Java(TM) virtual machine**\*** and the
language itself. The sandbox ensures that an untrusted, and possibly
malicious, application cannot gain access to system resources.

*[scope]{#scope}*

A characteristic of an identifier that determines where the identifier
can be used. Most identifiers in the Java(TM) programming environment
have either class or local scope. Instance and class variables and
methods have class scope; they can be used outside the class and its
subclasses only by prefixing them with an instance of the class or (for
class variables and methods) with the class name. All other variables
are declared within methods and have local scope; they can be used only
within the enclosing block.

*[Secure Socket Layer (SSL)]{#SSL}*

A protocol that allows communication between a Web browser and a server
to be encrypted for privacy.

*[servlet]{#servlet}*

A server-side program that gives Java(TM) technology-enabled servers
additional functionality.

*[short]{#short}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used to define a variable of
type short.

*[single precision]{#single precision}*

In the Java(TM) language specification, describes a floating point
number with 32 bits of data. See also *[double
precision](#double%20precision)*.

*[SGML]{#SGML}*

Standardized Generalized Markup Language. An ISO/ANSI/ECMA standard that
specifies a way to annotate text documents with information about types
of sections of a document.

*[static]{#static}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used to define a variable as a
class variable. Classes maintain one copy of class variables regardless
of how many instances exist of that class. \"static\" can also be used
to define a method as a class method. Class methods are invoked by the
class instead of a specific instance, and can only operate on class
variables.

*[static field]{#static field}*

Another name for *[class variable](#class%20variable)*.

*[static method]{#static method}*

Another name for *[class method](#class%20method)*.

*[subarray]{#subarray}*

An array that is inside another array.

*[subclass]{#subclass}*

A class that is derived from a particular class, perhaps with one or
more classes in between. See also *[superclass](#superclass)*,
*[supertype](#supertype)*.

*[subtype]{#subtype}*

If type X *extends* or implements type Y, then X is a subtype of Y. See
also *[supertype](#supertype)*.

*[superclass]{#superclass}*

A class from which a particular class is derived, perhaps with one or
more classes in between. See also *[subclass](#subclass)*,
*[subtype](#subtype)*.

*[super]{#super}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used to access members of a
class inherited by the class in which it appears.

*[supertype]{#supertype}*

The supertypes of a type are all the interfaces and classes that are
extended or implemented by that type. See also *[subtype](#subtype)*,
*[superclass](#superclass)*.

*[switch]{#switch}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used to evaluate a variable that
can later be matched with a value specified by the \"case\" keyword in
order to execute a group of statements.

*[Swing Set]{#Swing Set}*

The code name for a collection of graphical user interface (GUI)
components that runs uniformly on any native platform which supports the
Java(TM) virtual machine**\***. Because they are written entirely in the
Java programming language, these components may provide functionality
above and beyond that provided by native-platform equivalents. (Contrast
with [AWT](#awt).)

*[synchronized]{#synchronized}*

A keyword in the Java programming language that, when applied to a
method or code block, guarantees that at most one thread at a time
executes that code.

[***T***]{#T}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

*[TCP/IP]{#tcp}*

Transmission Control Protocol based on IP. This is an Internet protocol
that provides for the reliable delivery of streams of data from one host
to another. See also *[IP](#IP)*.

*[Technology Compatibility Kit (TCK)]{#TCK}*

A test suite, a set of tools, and other requirements used to certify an
implementation of a particular Sun technology conformant both to the
applicable specifications and to Sun or Sun-designated reference
implementations.

*[Thin Client]{#Thin Client}*

A system that runs a very light operating system with no local system
administration and executes applications delivered over the network.

*[this]{#this}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword that can be used to represent an
instance of the class in which it appears. \"this\" can be used to
access class variables and methods.

*[thread]{#thread}*

The basic unit of program execution. A process can have several threads
running concurrently, each performing a different job, such as waiting
for events or performing a time-consuming job that the program doesn\'t
need to complete before going on. When a thread has finished its job,
the thread is suspended or destroyed. See also *[process](#process)*.

*[throw]{#throw}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword that allows the user to throw an
exception or any class that implements the \"throwable\" interface.

*[throws]{#throws}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used in method declarations that
specify which exceptions are not handled within the method but rather
passed to the next higher level of the program.

*[transient]{#transient}*

A keyword in the Java programming language that indicates that a field
is not part of the serialized form of an object. When an object is
serialized, the values of its transient fields are not included in the
serial representation, while the values of its non-transient fields are
included.

*[try]{#try}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword that defines a block of
statements that may throw a Java language exception. If an exception is
thrown, an optional \"catch\" block can handle specific exceptions
thrown within the \"try\" block. Also, an optional \"finally\" block
will be executed regardless of whether an exception is thrown or not.

*[type]{#type}[]{#types}*

A class or interface.

[***U***]{#U}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

*[Unicode]{#Unicode}*

A 16-bit character set defined by ISO 10646. See also *[ASCII](#ascii)*.
All source code in the Java(TM) programming environment is written in
Unicode.

*[URL]{#URL}*

Uniform Resource Locator. A standard for writing a text reference to an
arbitrary piece of data in the WWW. A URL looks like
\"protocol://host/localinfo\" where protocol specifies a protocol to use
to fetch the object (like HTTP or FTP), host specifies the Internet name
of the host on which to find it, and localinfo is a string (often a file
name) passed to the protocol handler on the remote host.

[***V***]{#V}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

*[variable]{#variable}*

An item of data named by an identifier. Each variable has a type, such
as `int` or `Object`, and a scope. See also *[class
variable](#class%20variable)*, *[instance
variable](#instance%20variable)*, *[local variable](#local%20variable)*.

*[virtual machine]{#virtual machine}*

An abstract specification for a computing device that can be implemented
in different ways, in software or hardware. You compile to the
instruction set of a virtual machine much like you\'d compile to the
instruction set of a microprocessor. The Java(TM) virtual machine**\***
consists of a bytecode instruction set, a set of registers, a stack, a
garbage-collected heap, and an area for storing methods.

*[void]{#void}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used in method declarations to
specify that the method does not return any value. \"void\" can also be
used as a nonfunctional statement.

*[volatile]{#volatile}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used in variable declarations
that specifies that the variable is modified asynchronously by
concurrently running threads.

[***W***]{#W}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

*[wait]{#wait}*

A UNIX® command which will wait for all background processes to
complete, and report their termination status.

*[while]{#while}*

A Java(TM) programming language keyword used to declare a loop that
iterates a block of statements. The loop\`s exit condition is specified
as part of the while statement.

*[world readable files]{#world readable files}*

Files on a file system that can be viewed (read) by any user. For
example: files residing on web servers can only be viewed by Internet
users if their permissions have been set to world readable.

*[wrapper]{#wrapper}*

An object that encapsulates and delegates to another object to alter its
interface or behavior in some way.

*[WWW]{#WWW}*

World Wide Web. The web of systems and the data in them that is the
Internet. See also *[Internet](#Internet)*.

[***X***]{#X}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

[***Y***]{#Y}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

[***Z***]{#Z}[![Top](../images/glossaryArrow.gif){border="0"
hspace="30"}](#top)

**\*As used on this web site, the terms \"Java virtual machine\" or
\"JVM\" mean a virtual machine for the Java platform.**